A cabinet reshuffle announcement that was rumoured to take place on Thursday was abruptly postponed after President Cyril Ramaphosa fell ill, sources say. Insiders   confirmed Ramaphosa cancelled all his engagements, including consultative meetings with national ANC officials and tripartite alliance partners after he caught a cold earlier this week. His doctors are said to have told him on Wednesday that he had “flu-induced exhaustion” and was ordered to rest, according to several sources. “I’d rather keep the reshuffle delayed while he gathers strength. His doctors say it’s flu caused by exhaustion. He just needs to rest and he will be fine,” a senior ANC leader said. The presidency confirmed Ramaphosa is recovering, but denied that the much-anticipated cabinet reshuffle was scheduled for Thursday. Presidency spokesperson Vincent Magwenya said: “President Cyril Ramaphosa had a minor cold on Tuesday, but continued with his duties, including hosting [Ugandan] President Yoweri Museveni. There was never any announcement scheduled for Thursday.” Briefing the media at the Union Buildings during Museveni’s state visit, Ramaphosa sounded unwell, with ministers barely  able to hear him at a cabinet meeting on Wednesday. “He’s exhausted. He can’t talk, he doesn’t have a voice. Remember, he has not rested since December. He only took a week when he was in Cape Town, but he was still receiving envoys,” an insider said. TimesLIVE was reliably informed that the reshuffle will most likely take place on Sunday or Monday. According to several ANC leaders, it is likely to bring sweeping changes to the executive, with a cabinet minister saying: “Initially it didn’t look like it was going to be a big reshuffle, but I can say it is now showing signs of being extensive.” TimesLIVE also understands that Ramaphosa met ANC deputy president Paul Mashatile. Ramaphosa is said to have felt the need to put Mashatile at ease after rumours regarding machinations to block his imminent move to the Union Buildings. In a post-cabinet briefing on Thursday, minister in the Presidency Mondli Gungubele said Ramaphosa  has made an undertaking to appoint a minister of electricity.