The Entrepreneurial SME, hosted by Rams Mabote, is a weekly TV programme that charts the road to success for small business owners. After getting retrenched at the height of the Covid-19 pandemic with no source of income, Christelle Fredericks kickstarted her mobile business, founding Chrystell Health & Wellness Mobile Spa. She joins Rams Mabote on The Entrepreneurial SME to share her rollercoaster ride of setting up a successful small business in a volatile market. Tune in to the show on Business Day TV each week, Channel 412 on DStv, at 8.30pm on Tuesdays. Whether your business is facing an obstacle or is caught in a highly competitive cycle, Mabote talks to the captains of the SME sector and other experts and professionals who have the knowledge and insights to help SMEs grow and reach their full potential. These are the many entrepreneurs who make it against the odds — those who do not quit at the first sign of trouble. On this third episode of The Entrepreneurial SME, we look at SA's food industry which has been experiencing growth in revenue from year to year but remains highly competitive. Award-winning entrepreneur Kgomotso Motshegoa joins Rams Mabote to share his journey of starting his fast-food business — Corner Dladla Pizzeria — in the community of Protea Glen, Soweto. On this second episode of The Entrepreneurial SME, we see how, as fashion and retail continue to grow as a sector in SA, more entrepreneurs are finding a gap in the market and making profits from a niche product offering. Mabote is joined by the founder of Tumi Captivating Fashion, Tumi Nakedi, and Makgosi Mabaso, managing executive for home and business broadband at Telkom Business. Together they discuss SA's fashion industry and how SMMES can use various platforms to boost sales. On this first episode of The Entrepreneurial SME, Mabote is joined by the founder of 3NT Branding, Nontokozo Vilakazi, to discuss her journey to success and the impact that the current energy crisis has on her business. 