There has been  another delay in scrapping the Gauteng e-tolls after the provincial government conceded it failed to meet a 31 December deadline to deactivate the scheme. Over the past few years, the authorities have indicated several dates and deadlines for the  scheme to be scrapped and missed them all. “There is a process that needs to be followed by government so the technical team led by our director-general will assist us. As indicated by National Treasury, we have until December 31 to conclude that task,” Gauteng premier Panyaza Lesufi said in November. On  December 31,  Lesufi’s office  said due to the need to finalise “key components of the memorandum of understanding [MOU] between the national government and the provincial government”, the matter will now only be finalised “in the new year”. The planned deactivation of the scheme by  December 31 did not  happen. Scrapping the scheme requires formally declaring that  Gauteng freeways  are no longer toll roads  in a gazetted notice  by the department of transport.  Lesufi says the switch-off will take place 14 days after the gazette’s publication. Until the MOU  has been concluded the gazette will not be published and the SA National Roads Agency (Sanral) will continue to  levy e-tolls. After finance minister Enoch Godongwana’s announcement on  October 26  of a new financing mechanism for the Gauteng freeway upgrade debt to replace the failed e-toll scheme, Lesufi said e-tolls would be scrapped as soon as an agreement was reached with the Treasury. Outa CEO Wayne Duvenage said his organisation, which has been championing the scrapping of the tolls, is not surprised by the lack of movement. “The  small percentage of road users  still paying  e-tolls are wasting their money, as the likelihood of getting a refund is slim to zero,” Duvenage said. “We have also pointed out that those who have refused to pay  will not  suffer the negative consequences  Sanral  once threatened to apply. While the government continues to dilly-dally over the scheme’s final billing date, we suggest  the few who  still contribute to this defunct scheme  stop doing so now.” Support independent journalism by subscribing to the Sunday Times. Just R20 for the first month.